♪ ♪
TOM:
We await the arrival
of Colonel Lennox
and his company.
ALISON:
Will your family
be joining you, Colonel?
I have no such attachments.
♪ ♪
CHARLES:
Miss Lambe, I must confess
I noticed you
in the Assembly Rooms yesterday.
I wonder what it was
that caught your attention.
I want to give
my husband a child.
CHARLOTTE:
As I am resolved not to marry,
I will need an income.
ALISON:
A governess?
MARY:
For Mr. Colbourne,
of all people?
COLBOURNE:
The position is yours.
You start on Monday.
♪ ♪
(horses approaching,
seagulls cawing)
♪ ♪
LENNOX:
Miss Heywood.
Colonel Lennox.
Forgive me.
The other day
I spoke rashly.
You were honest.
It was refreshing.
Would that every young woman
spoke with such candor.
Thank you, Colonel.
But you'll have to excuse me.
You have an appointment?
I have a job,
as a governess.
Today will be
my first day.
Then I wish you every success.
Though I'd venture you succeed
in whatever you put
your mind to, Miss Heywood.
Oh!
And you can expect
an invitation.
♪ ♪
(bell tolling in distance)
ARTHUR:
All the agent could tell us
is that Sidney was in Antigua
on your behalf.
GEORGIANA:
And yet he didn't think
to tell me he was going?
Or for what purpose?
Well, he didn't tell
any of us.
We have written
to your father's employees.
But I'm afraid that it'll take
weeks to get a reply.
I shall make my own
enquiries.
What can this mean, Arthur?
I am certain it's of
no cause for concern.
Sidney will have had
your best interests at heart.
Just as I do.
(chuckles)
♪ ♪
(birds cawing)
(bell ringing inside)
♪ ♪
LADY DENHAM:
No, no, no!
I've never seen such a
fumble-fisted effort.
You could always
do it yourself, Aunt.
Well, then, what is the point
in having you here?
Oh, leave them.
(knock at door)
(door opens,
footsteps approaching)
Give it
to Lady Babington.
Well?
(door closes)
Colonel Lennox has invited us
to a mess dinner.
Oh.
Oh, I'm not dining in a tent!
Well, he's taken the
new Assembly Rooms.
And you're thinking Edward
will be there.
I can't help feeling,
what with his reappearance and
Dr. Fuchs's prognosis,
that God has taken
against me.
♪ ♪
MRS. WHEATLEY:
Miss Heywood,
you're late.
We were expecting you
at 9:00.
Mr. Colbourne has asked me
to tell you
you will receive your monies
at the end of the month.
Although few governesses
have lasted that long.
The household is making wagers
as to whether you'll last
the week.
But I've a shilling says
you will, so for my sake...
Be assured, Mrs. Wheatley,
your money is safe.
Very little daunts me
when my mind is made up.
When exactly did their
last governess...
COLBOURNE: Ah!
Miss Heywood, they haven't
scared you away yet?
Miss Heywood has only
just arrived, Mr. Colbourne.
Then I shall introduce you
to your charges.
Brace yourself.
♪ ♪
(Leonora exclaiming)
Leonora?
COLBOURNE:
Girls, you have met
Miss Heywood.
She is to be
your new governess.
Allow me
to reacquaint you.
My daughter Leonora
and my niece Augusta.
Pleased to see you
both again.
I trust you will show
Miss Heywood more courtesy
than you afforded
her predecessor.
Augusta, what was your
last lesson?
Embroidery.
Actually, I thought
perhaps we...
Your books will have to wait,
Miss Heywood,
until you have taught them
how to behave like
young ladies.
Reading is hardly unladylike.
As you can see, Leonora is in
dire need of a feminine hand,
while Augusta
lacks manners,
civility,
or any of the qualities
that would make her
remotely marriageable.
Good luck.
(door closes)
You must learn to parry,
Miss Heywood,
if you want to survive
this household.
♪ ♪
(seagulls cawing)
(whispering indistinctly)
♪ ♪
She's a disgrace!
(sighs)
You must try and be a little
more restrained, my dear.
It cost no small amount to
repair Lord Kingsley's carriage.
And now Mr. Hartswood...
Why are you so desperate
to see me married?
(sighs)
Society is not as kind
or as welcoming
as one would hope, Georgiana.
As you know only too well.
And your fortune
leaves you vulnerable.
A good marriage
will offer you protection.
Acceptance.
CHARLES:
Ladies.
Mr. Lockhart.
Why such a solemn demeanor
on this fine day, Miss Lambe?
I was in a positively joyous
mood, Mr. Lockhart,
until I saw you.
Then I shall leave you to it,
for fear of spoiling your mood
any further.
♪ ♪
ALISON:
He is approaching the house
in his uniform!
MARY:
Who?
The soldier who saved me
from certain death!
I do not even know his name.
Oh, it is you?
Oh, a pleasure to see you, too,
Miss Heywood.
What is your business, sir?
On behalf of Colonel Lennox,
I have the honor of inviting
the Parker household
to a mess dinner.
And the colonel
has expressly requested
the honor
of Miss Charlotte Heywood's
company.
I'm sure she will
graciously accept.
Oh, and, uh,
Captain Carter
sends his regards
and regrets he is unable
to call in person.
Captain Carter?
Is he the soldier
from the beach?
Young, handsome?
He is young.
And it's not for me
to say if he is handsome.
Then send him my very best
regards in return.
♪ ♪
Carter!
His name is Captain Carter!
And this will be my first ever
grand dinner.
I've already worn Charlotte's
good dress.
I will gladly lend you
one of mine.
You are a true friend!
I wish it was Captain Carter
that had called.
How am I to endure
an entire day without seeing
his face?
I saw a pretty hat this morning.
Perhaps you'd like to come
and see it with me?
Yes!
CHARLOTTE:
If you gently pull the needle
up and through...
AUGUSTA:
Miss Heywood.
Yes, Miss Markham?
It is Miss Heywood,
isn't it?
Yes.
Uh, then you are
not married?
No.
Nor have you ever been?
Then how is that you are
to ready me for a life
which you yourself
have quite roundly failed in?
That is like having a
riding instructor who has never
sat in a saddle.
(chuckles)
LEONORA:
Or a pirate
that's never gutted a man.
Hmm.
I have never been to France,
yet my French is more
than passable.
LEONORA:
Ouch!
Damn these needles!
Miss Colbourne.
AUGUSTA:
Do not give up.
See what I have made
just for Miss Heywood.
I do hope I have spelt
"spinster" right.
You see it is not a word
I am particularly
familiar with.
Nor am I ever likely to be.
(handbell ringing)
I do believe it is time
for luncheon.
Come along, Leo.
The governess takes hers
in the kitchen, of course.
Alone. But then again,
I suppose you are used to that,
poor, dear Miss Heywood.
(footsteps retreating,
Augusta and Leonora giggling)
♪ ♪
EDWARD:
Esther.
Forgive me, I didn't expect
to find you here.
On the promenade
or in Sanditon?
Either, if I'm honest.
And yet does it not feel like
fate that we should both
find ourselves back here
at the same time?
Fate played no part in this.
It's all a contrivance.
You're fooling no one,
least of all me.
What will it take to convince
you I'm truly repentant?
Try drowning yourself.
♪ ♪
MRS. WHEATLEY:
Miss Markham's work,
I assume?
She is very... adept.
On the contrary.
I see several
dropped stitches.
You're not going to let her
get away with that?
I don't want to
punish her, Mrs. Wheatley.
I want to understand her.
Is it so hard
to understand?
She's 18 years old
and not long orphaned.
And Leonora lost her mother,
too?
That was many years ago now.
We don't dwell on it.
Remember, girl,
I've a shilling on you.
HANKINS:
Lady Babington!
(chuckling):
You appear to be
our sole congregant for matins!
(chuckles)
Oh, you will remember,
of course, my dear sister,
Miss Beatrice Hankins?
A pleasure,
Lady Babington.
I cannot stay,
thrilling as matins sounds.
And, uh, how is married life?
Will, uh, Lord Babington
be joining us
during the summer months?
I do hope so.
It is not right for husband
and wife to be too long apart.
Not if they wish to bless
their home with children.
As the Psalms tell us,
"Children are an heritage
of the Lord."
"And the fruit of the womb
is his reward."
That is no concern of yours!
I forgot to mention
the charity darning circle.
Oh...
(bird cawing)
Lady Babington?
Lady Babington.
We are not well acquainted,
and I do not wish to presume...
You already have,
Miss Hankins.
Oh, forgive me.
But I am a Christian woman,
with Christian feeling,
and recognize when another
of my sex is in need.
Thank you.
I am in no need
of your charity.
It is not charity
I am offering.
(quietly):
I have heard tell
of a midwife of Melmead.
A Mrs. Potter.
She helps women who have
struggled, as I believe
you might be
struggling.
Well...
I have done my part.
The rest is in God's hands.
♪ ♪
ARTHUR:
This is just a crude rendering,
of course,
but it gives you
a sense of it.
And it would sit right here.
The Theatre Royal Sanditon!
It, it is a wonderful idea,
brother.
Hm? Oh...
But this would
require
a great deal of investment
and we cannot afford to gamble.
Speculators speculate!
That's what you have always
said.
Yes, that does sound like me.
We shall talk
more of it anon.
But now I have promised
to give Colonel Lennox
a tour of Sanditon.
Come on, Arthur!
We are most honored
by the invitation, Colonel.
I cannot tell you
the excitement it has caused
amongst the women
of our household.
(chuckles):
We have been made
so welcome by the town.
I hope the dinner
will go some small way
towards showing our gratitude.
(chuckling):
Yes.
Now, if you look up there,
Colonel, you will see
we are just finishing
the Seaview Apartments,
and now we are considering
our next expansion.
We have been discussing
a theater.
I've been drawing up
grand plans:
a gilt proscenium,
a balcony...
Well, well, yes,
at some future point, Arthur,
perhaps.
But right now,
we cannot afford
to take any risks if we are to
repay Sidney's investment.
Sidney?
Our dear departed brother.
It was he that secured
Sanditon's future.
What a fine legacy,
Mr. Parker.
Thank you, sir.
Were Sidney here,
I am sure that you and he
would find much in common.
ARTHUR:
Some things.
(chuckling):
Perhaps.
TOM:
And he would want to
encourage you,
as I do,
to consider extending
your stay indefinitely.
I've been thinking further
on the idea
of a permanent barracks.
Which I feel could be
of great mutual benefit.
With your permission, Colonel,
I have a site
I wish to show you.
By all means, Tom.
(chuckles)
Theatre Royal Sanditon.
♪ ♪
ALISON:
Are you sure this is wise,
Miss Lambe?
Or appropriate?
I have had my fill
of being told
what is and isn't
appropriate.
FRASER:
Left, right...
Do not betray your feelings
too readily.
Try to appear aloof.
We've invaded his camp.
It is hardly aloof.
FRASER:
Come on.
Ready?
Right!
Left!
Head! Right! Left!
Head!
Right! Up!
Right! Left!
Left! Right!
(Carter groans, Alison gasps)
Miss Heywood?
Ladies, this is no place
for a young woman.
Let them stay a moment,
Fraser.
I am unharmed.
I simply came to thank you, sir,
for saving me so gallantly
yesterday.
I cannot take all the credit,
miss.
You have my undying gratitude.
Miss Heywood, you are to attend
the mess dinner?
I would not miss it
for the world.
Then I might be so bold
as to request the first dance
of the evening.
I would be honored to.
FRASER:
I must insist you ladies
leave the camp.
I shall escort you
to the bridge.
Really, sir,
have you no heart at all?
None.
Just a cold, hard rock
in its place.
♪ ♪
(birds twittering)
LEONORA:
Look, there's another one!
CHARLOTTE (gasps):
Well done, Miss Colbourne.
And what do we do with
our specimens, Miss Heywood?
We shall examine them,
like malacologists.
This silly dress!
I wish I could wear
my short britches.
They would be rather more
practical.
Father says
it's unladylike.
My mother says a woman
should dress appropriately
for whatever activity
she is engaged upon.
I'm not sure my father
would agree with that.
Is she still alive,
your mother?
Yes, she is.
I don't miss mine,
before you ask.
Although Father doesn't even
like us to mention her name.
What do you remember of her?
Nothing.
She died when I was a baby.
You must miss her a little.
You can't miss
what you never had.
Of course you can.
For example, Miss Heywood misses
the husband she doesn't have.
Don't you?
♪ ♪
(waves lapping,
seagulls cawing)
(yawns)
Do not move!
Please!
I only have
a silk handkerchief.
(laughs)
Fear not, Mr. Parker.
I could not resist such a
peaceful subject.
Then I am honored, sir.
Honored.
Might I be permitted to...
Oh!
You have a rare talent.
Please.
I should very much like
to paint your friend Miss Lambe.
But I fear she's taken
against me.
Oh, that is just her manner.
(chuckles)
She clearly holds you
in high esteem.
Perhaps you could convince her
that I am not entirely
without merit.
I would forever be in your debt.
Oh, say no more, sir.
I shall make it my mission.
In the meantime,
you shall have to
content yourself with
a much less beguiling model.
I will not hear it.
You have a rare masculine
beauty, Mr. Parker.
Indeed?
Undoubtedly so.
In Paris, you would be fêted
in the salons for your charm
and in the Tuileries
for your style.
(chuckling):
Oh, I should love to be
fêted in the Tuileries!
(laughs)
And I am certain one day,
you shall.
(chuckles)
♪ ♪
Can we really make a home
for the water snails?
Of course.
Now, if we could find
a magnifying glass...
I suspect there is one
in your father's study.
Oh! Miss Colbourne!
Leonora,
it is customary to knock.
What is so urgent?
Look!
Snails?
CHARLOTTE:
Water snails, sir.
We collected them from the pond
to examine them more closely.
We were in want
of a magnifying glass.
COLBOURNE:
Really, well, one snail...
One magnifying glass.
Which I shall need back.
Thank you.
We're being malacologists.
Would you like to see
our other specimens?
Tempting as that is,
I shall have to decline.
CHARLOTTE:
Come, Miss Colbourne,
your father is busy.
Miss Heywood.
Forgive me,
I must have been unclear.
I thought I engaged you to make
a young lady of Leonora.
That is precisely
what I'm doing.
By trawling ponds for mollusks?
I am widening her knowledge.
She has no interest
in embroidery, sir.
And you see how engaged she is.
If you could just spare a moment
to let her show you...
Thank you,
Miss Heywood,
but you are here to further
the girls' education, not mine.
Then I shall leave you
to your work, sir.
Planorbis carinatus.
Keeled ram's horn.
If you're going to be
malacologists,
you might as well use
the correct terminology.
♪ ♪
Thank you.
(giggling)
You don't look quite as excited
as your sister.
But then, who does?
I confess I am strangely
apprehensive.
The last time I danced
in Sanditon...
Was with Sidney.
You must try to put that
from your mind.
We're going to enjoy
ourselves tonight.
We shall eat and drink and dance
and forget all our cares!
I insist upon it.
Ladies, it's my honor
to welcome you this evening.
Miss Heywood,
it's a particular pleasure
to see you again.
After supper, might I claim
the first dance?
Thank you, sir.
Excuse me, Colonel, but I really
must greet the family Parker.
So, Miss Heywood,
how are you finding
your new job?
Thus far, highly rewarding.
You doubt me, sir.
You've previously spoken
with such candor.
It is strange to hear you
dissemble.
(sighing, quietly):
I have two charges.
One I've gained
some ground with,
but the elder girl is...
resistant.
(quietly):
Gaining ground is my vocation,
Miss Heywood.
We shall form a battle strategy
before the night is out.
(chuckles)
LADY DENHAM:
Herbs?!
I should never have thought
you so credulous!
Neither Fuchs nor any doctor
I have consulted can help me.
Fuchs sounds positively rational
besides this charlatan.
And you went to her house?
She is no charlatan.
Mrs. Potter has assisted
many women.
And if nothing else,
she has given me hope.
What do I have to lose?
(sighing):
I knew we should not
have come.
LADY DENHAM:
Pay him no heed.
He is no threat
to either of us.
♪ ♪
LADY DENHAM:
Miss Heywood, Miss Lambe.
GEORGIANA:
Lady Denham.
Lady Babington.
I understand you are behind this
sugar boycott, Miss Lambe.
I take it you won't be
joining us.
Life affords few enough
pleasures as it is.
Forgive me, my lady.
I'd forgotten you lived a life
of such deprivation.
Alison,
I spy Captain Carter.
♪ ♪
Oh, oh, Miss Lambe,
Miss Heywood.
I, I believe you have met
my dear friend Mr. Lockhart.
I wasn't aware you were
so well acquainted.
Oh, yes!
I, I cannot praise
this gentleman enough.
He is a fine fellow,
and, and, I might add,
quite a remarkable
portraitist.
I shall take your word for it.
CHARLES:
Are you not inclined
to make your own opinion,
Miss Lambe?
I already have.
Excuse us.
♪ ♪
She is definitely
warming up to you.
(chuckles):
I admire your optimism.
Excuse me one moment,
Mr. Lockhart.
♪ ♪
Oh, excusez-moi.
Ah.
Huh.
♪ ♪
Remember,
try not to seem too eager.
♪ ♪
Miss Heywood.
Captain Carter.
How elegant you look.
Thank you.
And what a beautiful setting.
I am reminded of
these lines of Cowper:
"I fly to scenes romantic."
I feel as though
I have flown here myself.
Indeed.
Cowper, yes.
What a genius he is.
I worship his poetry.
As do I!
Which is your favorite?
I, uh...
(chuckles)
I could hardly choose!
(laughs)
Supper, Miss Lambe!
♪ ♪
What a fine table, Colonel.
Thank you, milady.
I'm glad it meets your approval.
♪ ♪
Where are you, Charlotte?
BEATRICE:
Miss Heywood!
You're down here, with us.
Oh...
This is what comes
of being a governess.
Forced to sit with the
spinsters.
Cast out from society.
Hardly.
(quietly):
It's only the other end
of the table.
♪ ♪
Miss Heywood.
It seems we are to be
seated together.
I hope you can endure
my company
since you are so often keen
to be rid of me.
I shall have to endure it
as stoically as I can.
♪ ♪
ARTHUR:
Good gracious!
(chuckles)
What luck!
♪ ♪
(drums pounding)
(applauding)
♪ ♪
ARTHUR:
Is not this repast
delicious, Mr. Lockhart?
I thought the lamb
was a little tough.
And somewhat cold.
If it is so unpalatable,
why don't you leave it?
I am sure it
would not miss you.
I'm waiting for it
to surprise me.
Why should it?
Well, I think it's jolly well
delightful.
(chuckles)
FRASER:
Shall I ask
Captain Carter
if we might exchange places?
Forgive me,
I do not mean to be rude.
I'm not in the least
offended.
I cannot blame you for seeking
his company over mine.
He is unforgivably handsome,
after all.
Are you mocking me?
I wouldn't dream of it.
Yes, I, uh...
(clears throat)
I considered the Army myself.
But ultimately, uh,
I felt that
my gift for oratory was
better suited to the church.
(chuckles)
Besides, one of my legs
is a full inch shorter
than the other,
which might have proved
disadvantageous in battle.
But now you serve
the King of all kings, brother!
Yes.
(people talking in background)
(quietly):
I notice the other ladies
are enthralled
by the soldiers in our midst,
yet you seem quite indifferent.
It takes a good deal
more than a red coat
and some brass buttons
to impress me.
Likewise.
I find our island's veneration
for the military
vaguely repulsive.
And yet you accepted
the colonel's invitation.
Is that not
rather hypocritical?
I accepted out of curiosity
and boredom.
What's your excuse?
I had little choice.
It would have been considered
very ill-mannered of me
to decline.
You didn't strike me
as someone overly concerned
with winning the approval
of others.
I must admit
I'm quite disappointed.
Then it is a good thing your
opinion means nothing to me.
LENNOX:
Gentlemen.
(chairs shifting)
The king.
MEN:
The king!
♪ ♪
CHARLES:
I should like to make
a toast of my own.
♪ ♪
In 1814,
Emperor Napoleon
abolished slavery.
He was not just a soldier,
but a man of vision.
A man who recognized
that ideas...
....rule the world.
Not might alone.
(chuckles)
To Napoleon Bonaparte.
(soldiers pounding table)
SOLDIERS (chanting):
Out! Out! Out! Out!
Thank you.
(pounding and chanting continue)
(pounding and chanting stop)
LADY DENHAM:
Ignore him.
He's just an artist.
♪ ♪
(people talking softly,
instruments tuning)
I am sorry we could not
be seated together.
You might have saved me from my
infuriating dinner companion.
He certainly caused
quite a scandal.
Did I notice you smile?
Certainly not!
It was a grimace.
Although I have a feeling
you'll shortly have cause
to smile yourself.
LENNOX:
Miss Heywood.
CHARLOTTE:
Colonel Lennox.
(people talking in background)
ARTHUR:
Miss Lambe,
you should be dancing.
I insist upon it.
I have been waiting for you.
(both giggling)
(people talking in background)
Miss Heywood, would you still
do me the honor?
With the greatest
of pleasure, sir.
(music playing)
Given you profess to
loathe the man,
you do seem rather
fascinated by him.
As do you, Arthur.
(Arthur chuckles)
(music continues)
I must apologize for the
seating arrangements at dinner.
If it weren't for convention,
I would have...
It's all right.
I know my place
as a lowly governess.
There's nothing lowly about you,
Miss Heywood.
(music continues)
Do you remember the first time
we danced together?
The day my father
married your mother.
It took me an hour to find
the courage to ask you.
I was in awe of you then.
I still am.
♪ ♪
(Schubert's Marche Militaire
No. 1 playing)
That one doesn't let
the grass grow.
In battle, we defeated our enemy
by holding fire
until he was very close,
then charging with bayonets
and firing a single volley.
A rather extreme strategy for
educating an 18-year-old girl,
wouldn't you say?
My meaning is,
wait till your enemy's close,
then you may take
your best shot.
Let her see you,
you may best see her.
(piece ends)
(applauding)
Perhaps that's true.
I should be more open with her.
Then hopefully I shall have
no need to employ the bayonet.
(chuckles)
(people talking in background)
TOM:
Colonel.
ARTHUR:
Oh, excuse me.
Arthur.
Yes, brother, I'm here.
At supper, Colonel Lennox
was highly complimentary
about your stepbrother.
I didn't recognize
the man he described.
Apologies for the Lockhart
fellow's outburst.
Believe me, he does not
represent Sanditon.
ARTHUR:
It's just his sense of humor.
Please, gentlemen.
(men cheering,
laughing raucously)
So...
To friendship.
♪ ♪
Now, let's forget any troubles
we have with a game.
This is not the time
to gamble.
My brother is right.
I do not wish
to lose my money.
Then I'll stake you.
(men cheering)
Captain Carter, the dice.
I'm staking Mr. Parker
five pounds.
Tom?
Well, Tom?
Are you in or out?
♪ ♪
Knock.
(knocks)
Now you throw for main point.
Which means you need the five,
six, seven, eight, or nine.
Of course--
main point.
(dice rattling)
(dice clatter)
CARTER:
Seven!
Hey!
Very good.
♪ ♪
(music playing)
I suppose that toast
was for my benefit.
Don't flatter yourself.
It was for my own amusement.
And was it worth it,
given it has earned you
the contempt of almost everyone
in the room?
Almost everyone?
Who's the exception?
I made a decision
not so long ago not to care
what anyone thinks of me.
It was enormously liberating.
I prefer to live my life
on my own terms,
outside the narrow confines
of polite society.
I highly recommend it.
Then again,
it takes a brave lamb
to wander from the flock.
♪ ♪
(men groan)
You need to roll a four
to win.
(dice rattling)
(men groaning loudly)
TOM:
Wait, what just
happened?
You threw a four.
They lost, you won.
(exhales)
And if I'd not thrown a four?
You'd have paid back
double the stakes.
I need to sit down.
You played admirably, Tom.
You're a worthy opponent,
indeed.
Get this man
a bottle of wine!
(music playing)
ALISON:
I am trying to follow
Georgiana's advice
and be more reserved,
but it is so hard
when I am with him.
Try not to fall too fast,
Alison.
Can't you feel
from my heartbeat
that it's just too late
for such advice?
(piece ends, applauding)
LADY DENHAM:
Edward.
I intend to ask your colonel
to join me for tea tomorrow.
I wish to show him
my brother's medals.
I'm sure he'd be delighted,
Aunt.
Hmm...
And it would also provide
an opportunity for him
to give his unvarnished
impression of you.
Edward...
Might I persuade you
to dance?
Sister, I would gladly...
Not with me.
I'd rather dance barefoot
on broken glass.
Miss Hankins.
(people talking in background)
(music playing)
(music continues)
Which of them is this
designed to humiliate?
Neither.
It's to repay Miss Hankins
for her kindness.
And to see how far
Edward would go
to prove he's a human being.
(music continues)
♪ ♪
(people talking in background)
(chuckles)
Can I interest you
in a nightcap, Mr. Parker?
I have a rather good port wine
in my studio.
Oh, well, I adore port wine.
♪ ♪
Alison?
Thank you, Captain.
I have had the most wonderful
evening.
As have I.
Worthy of Cowper.
Thank you.
Fraser, you must help me.
Miss Heywood, she is a woman
of refinement, poetry.
You know such things.
Please.
Why?
As a friend
and fellow officer, Declan.
(sighs)
(chuckles)
Thank you.
I'll be forever in your debt.
♪ ♪
Miss Heywood.
Thank you for your advice
on military strategy.
I hope it proves useful.
Let me know if you wish
to borrow a cannon.
(laughs):
I'm not sure Mr. Colbourne
would sanction that.
Colbourne, did you say?
Yes.
Why? Do you know him?
Only by reputation.
I bid you a good evening.
Good evening.
♪ ♪
(seagulls squawking)
I wondered if there was anyone
who caught your eye
at dinner last night.
Unlike Alison, I don't swoon
at the sight of a soldier.
It was not a soldier
you were sitting next to.
I maintain my first impression
of Mr. Lockhart:
he's all conceit
and affectation.
I'd hoped you'd find yourself
sitting next to someone
handsome and eligible...
No more talk of marriage.
I beg you.
I've had my fill of suitors.
If any man is to request an
audience, you are to decline.
If and when I marry,
it will be on my terms.
Mine and mine alone.
LENNOX:
I hope you didn't mind
my asking Captain Denham
to join us, milady.
He was as keen to hear about
his late uncle as I am.
Yes, well, Edward has always
taken a very keen interest
in family matters.
LENNOX:
I'm not surprised your nephew
is from such a
distinguished lineage.
These past months,
he has proved himself
an exemplary officer.
Honorable, courageous,
disciplined.
LADY DENHAM:
Yes, so you said,
at the mess dinner.
If I may...
(places cup and saucer down)
I know familial relations
between you have been strained
in the past.
But when he joined up,
Captain Denham spoke
of a desire to atone.
And nothing I've seen since
has caused me
to doubt his sincerity.
LADY DENHAM:
Colonel Lennox,
let me show you
Maximilian's portrait.
(door opens)
I trust you two can be
civil with each other
if I leave you alone.
LADY DENHAM (in distance):
Now, this portrait was painted
when he was 17.
Miss Colbourne and I
are going to look for food
for her snails this afternoon.
Will you join us?
The charms of a simple farm girl
may work on a child,
but they do little
to enchant me.
Nor any potential suitor,
I should imagine.
Hmm, maybe that is why you are
condemned to such a loveless
and lonely life, Miss Heywood.
(inhales):
Well, one of the reasons.
I have known love, Miss Markham.
Hmm.
And let me guess, he ignored
your every simpering advance.
(turns page)
No.
I was loved in return.
But circumstances
conspired against us.
Then he died.
♪ ♪
Miss Markham,
our lives may seem worlds apart,
but I know what it means
to grieve.
♪ ♪
(exhales sharply)
We are nothing alike,
Miss Heywood.
Tell me something.
Your parents.
A happy memory, perhaps.
I...
I used to play for them.
Lively tunes that would make
everyone laugh.
They would sing.
(exhales)
I could play for you.
If you'd like.
My Aunt Lucy's spinet
in the drawing room.
We can unlock it.
I should very much like that.
♪ ♪
Esther, if our aunt
can forgive me...
Well, that remains very much
in question.
I'm sorry,
desperately sorry,
for how I wronged you.
But ever since
my return to Sanditon,
I've done my best to prove
to you that I am reformed.
Does the colonel's word
count for nothing?
I barely know the man.
I know you all too well.
But you're not the same woman
that you once were.
Marriage has transformed you.
You carry yourself
differently.
You have an assurance
that you never had before.
That's because I escaped
your influence.
I don't doubt it.
But the point is,
if you can be
so utterly changed,
is it not possible
that I might be, too?
♪ ♪
(fallboard clatters,
remains shut)
Why is it kept locked?
You know Leonora.
She will have it destroyed
in an instant.
(lock turns)
(shutter opens)
(playing tune)
(out-of-tune note playing)
Seems it hasn't been played
in some time.
It's a bit out of tune.
My ear is not
refined enough to say.
Perhaps you could play
something.
(begins piece)
(out-of-tune chord plays)
(plays notes hesitantly)
I'm a bit out of practice.
(piece continues slowly)
Louder.
(spinet playing in distance)
(piece continues)
Stop.
(stops playing)
Forgive me, sir, I...
This is locked
for a reason.
Who told you
you could play it?
Augusta, this has your name
written all over it.
No, sir-- it was I.
I asked one of the servants
for the key.
What is the point
in a spinet
if not to be played?
(Leonora shouting)
COLBOURNE:
Leonora, what are you wearing?!
Miss Heywood said a woman
can dress for whatever
suits her purpose.
She says a girl can be whatever
she wants to be.
(door closes)
CHARLOTTE:
I have tried,
Mr. Colbourne.
And like those before you,
you have failed.
No, sir.
I shall not shoulder
that burden alone.
You told me I'm not here
to educate you,
but there is much
you have to learn.
Miss Colbourne lacks a mother
and also a father.
She lost the former
to the grave
and the latter to his work.
And Miss Markham,
were she to let anyone in,
might become a woman
of lively intellect,
ready to step into society,
as you desire.
But who listens to her?
Who even speaks
in this house of silence,
this mausoleum?
So, this may be the last lesson
I teach in this house,
but it is decidedly
the most pertinent!
You wish to leave?
No, but I assumed...
Tomorrow, then.
Same time.
♪ ♪
It seems you owe me
a shilling, sir.
(birds twittering)
Why did you lie for me?
Why did you lie to me?
I wanted you gone.
To be replaced
by another governess?
Then another?
My parents have been replaced.
My home.
My whole life.
Then forge a new life.
A new path.
That is what I'm trying to do.
I didn't lie to you.
I did use to play
for my parents.
We did laugh.
And you shall again.
♪ ♪
(knock at door)
(door opens)
What is it?
♪ ♪
Clara?
I thought I'd made it
perfectly clear that you were
never to darken my doors again!
Throw her out!
No!
Aunt...
I have nowhere else to turn.
I have been used
and abandoned.
That is no concern
of ours.
Please!
I am with child!
Oh!
It is Edward's!
♪ ♪
(exhales)
ALISON:
So, who are you dreaming of?
Your strange new employer?
Or a certain colonel?
(sighing):
Alison.
GEORGIANA:
What do you want from me?
Isn't it obvious?
ALISON:
He's both a hero and a poet.
LENNOX:
Be on your guard
against Mr. Colbourne.
Just take my word.
♪ ♪
ANNOUNCER:
Go to our website,
listen to our podcast,
watch video, and more.
To order this program,
visit ShopPBS.
"Masterpiece"
is available with PBS Passport
and on Amazon Prime Video.
♪ ♪